=== PAGE 69 ===
Phase 3: Transactional reload.  Finally, the engine reloads the stale entries. It invalidates 
the accepted modules’ caches 3, backing up each removed module to enable rollback, then re-
imports each stale entry’s component module by its url and swaps in a fresh fiber:
Algorithm 10 Transactional module reload
1 function reload(ctx, accepted, stale_entries)
2 backup ← invalidate_caches(accepted)
3 try
4 for entry in stale_entries do
5 entry.fiber.dispose()
6 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(import(entry.url), entry.config)
7 catch error
8 restore_caches(backup)
9 for entry in stale_entries do
10 entry.fiber.dispose()
11 entry.fiber ← ctx.use(backup[entry.url], entry.config)
12 throw error
The transactional guarantee ensures that the system never enters a half-reloaded state: if 
any module fails to import (e.g., due to a syntax error), the caches are restored and every 
stale entry is rebuilt from backup[entry.url], the previous component whose cache was just 
restored, undoing the swaps already made.
5.3.  Case Study: Koishi
Koishi is an open-source chatbot application framework built on Cordis 4. Over four years of 
development, it has accumulated over 4000 community-contributed plugins 5, ranging from 
instant-messaging (IM) adapters and database drivers to administrative consoles and end-
user features. Its scale and diversity make it a representative validation of Cordis’s dynamic 
composability in a production setting.
Expressiveness and generality of the meta-framework.  Koishi runs as a server-side bot 
whose every feature is realized as a plugin over the context primitives of Section 5.1; Koishi 
itself contributes only the chatbot-domain vocabulary. The same model reappears in a wholly 
different runtime: Koishi’s web console is a second, independent Cordis application whose 
plugins compose the primitives of the browser and its user interface rather than those of the 
server. The disparate settings above establish two properties of the model of Section 3. (1) It 
is expressive: its primitives suffice to carry a complete production system, the host framework 
supplying only domain vocabulary. (2) It is general: it fixes how effects and coeffects compose 
while leaving their meaning to each application, and so presupposes neither a particular 
domain nor a particular runtime.
Temporal composability without cognitive overhead.  The plugin systems surveyed in 
Section 1.2.1 cannot unload an individual extension’s effects without restarting the extension 
3On Node.js, this means clearing the caches of both the ES module and CommonJS module systems, since a 
module imported through the ES loader can appear in both.
4Koishi currently uses Cordis v3. This paper presents Cordis v4, which refines the effect and coeffect semantics 
and redesigns the loader; the core compositional model is shared across both versions.
5Koishi uses the term plugin for the concept this paper formalizes as component.
69
=== PAGE 70 ===
host. Koishi routinely performs this operation: an orchestrator disables a plugin from the 
console and its effects are reverted in place; during development, the HMR engine re-applies 
edited plugins on save while preserving cache state and live connections elsewhere in the 
system. Cordis makes such removal not merely possible but effortless for the plugin author. 
Because effects performed through the context are tracked and their inverses composed auto -
matically (Section 3.1), even an inexperienced author obtains ordered cleanup for a plugin’s 
context-mediated effects without writing an uninstall path. This achieves the locality of concern 
whose absence Section 1.2.1 identifies: correctness that would otherwise rest on each author’s 
diligence is instead discharged once, by the abstraction.
Spatial composability across an open ecosystem.  In contrast to the plugin systems of 
Section 1.2.1, where inter-plugin dependencies are largely absent, Koishi’s ecosystem exhibits 
a genuine dependency topology: IM adapters provide access to each messaging platform, 
database drivers provide persistent storage, and functional plugins declare these as coeffects 
and access them. Reconfiguring a provider at runtime, such as switching the storage backend or 
reconnecting an adapter, reactivates only the dependents whose resolved dependency changed 
(Section 3.2); a plugin whose dependency is unavailable stays inactive until it appears, without 
erroring. What the case study substantiates is that this composition holds across independently 
authored code: a plugin and its dependencies are typically written by different authors who 
coordinate on nothing beyond the coeffect that connects them, so reactive coeffects keep the 
assembly consistent across an open ecosystem of independent contributors.
Threats to validity. The evidence here is drawn from a single ecosystem in a single host lan-
guage, so it cannot separate the merits of the paradigm from those of its TypeScript realization 
or of Koishi’s particular domain, and it is observational rather than a controlled comparison 
against an alternative architecture. What the case study establishes is thus an existence-and-
adoption result rather than a quantitative one; measuring the abstraction’s overhead and its 
effect on developer productivity against a baseline remains future work.
6.  Discussion
The formal model and implementation presented in the preceding sections introduce a 
programming paradigm for dynamic composability. This section examines how the paradigm 
extends to broader engineering concerns, and discusses the design tensions and open prob -
lems.
6.1.  System Boundary
Every effect in Section 3.1 carries an inverse, and what that inverse amounts to is settled by the 
system boundary. The boundary divides the environment a system runs against into two parts. 
(1) A location lies inside when the system is able to modify it exclusively and to restore the state 
before that modification, so an operation on it is tracked in Γ and can be reverted later. (2) A 
location lies outside when either ability fails, so an operation on it acts as idΓ and is therefore 
neither tracked nor reverted. This section develops the properties of this boundary and their 
consequences for recovery.
Boundaries from coeffects. A coeffect moves the boundary by reifying an external location: 
it confines every access to that location to a set of operations it provides, each of which it can 
supply an inverse for, so operations that acted as idΓ come to be tracked in Γ and reverted. The 
70
